INPUT AND OUTPUT

Input is specified as key value pairs in a text file.  As a convenience, the
input file may be valid Python, MATLAB, or Bash shell code.  This practice
facilitates using the input parameters in other pre- or post-processing tasks.
Large data sets such as the material model are stored separately in
floating-point binary files.  Annotated example input files are located in the
'in/' directory.  The input file 'defaults.m', that is read before any other
input, contains a short description of each SORD parameter.

Output is saved in binary formant.  Associated metadata files 'meta.py' and
'meta.m' contain a summary of parameters for the run, and a structured
description of the binary output.  MATLAB utilities for manipulating and
visualizing SORD output are included in the 'm/' directory.  Using the 'read4d'
function for accessing SORD binary output correctly accounts for byte order
when moving data between big-endian and little-endian architectures.  Separate
Fortran utilities are also included in the 'util/' directory for converting the
byte order of binary files, and for converting to and from ASCII text format.

Statistic, such as peak acceleration and peak velocity, are computed
periodically during each run and stored in the directory 'stats/'.
Additionally, internal code timings, for benchmarking performance, are
collected and saved to the 'prof/' directory.  Inspecting these files during a
run is a good way to check that it is proceeding correctly.  The raw binary
files can be examined with the standard UNIX command 'od -f' or with the
included Fortran utilities.  The 'stats' utility computes the minimum, maximum,
and mean values for binary files.


